LLMs have been a source of anxiety in many academic disciplines, particularly the humanities, for the mechanisms by which responses are generated remain unknown, and the responses are often unverifiable. This article proposes a modus operandi making LLMs and their reasoning more transparent to users. We use an open-source LLM framework (H2OGPT) to analyze a corpus digitized and uploaded by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), which is renowned for its leading role in global rice research since its establishment in the 1960s. The H2OGPT framework allows researchers to control the text input and the source citations used to generate each response through its retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) capability.


Based on such infrastructure, we interacted with the model to audit the perspectives expressed in IRRI’s corpus produced between the 1960s and 1991. According to current historiography, IRRI has been criticized for overlooking women and markets, two key elements of rice production in West Africa. We therefore asked questions about these two themes and verified whether the LLM critically engaged with these known blind spots. The interaction with the LLM illustrated uneven performance in analytical competencies across retrieval, summary, analysis, and inference between the two selected themes, and unpredictable distance between the cited sources and the response.  Some of these differences appear to be related to the distribution of relevant information within the corpus. The starkest contrast concerned sanitation issues. The model sanitized the corpus’s marginalization of women’s role, while, when asked about the critical problems in rice trade in West Africa, the LLM answered that the problem lay in rice production itself. Such an answer very much reflected IRRI’s focus on production rather than on marketing or consumption. Beneath the variety of response qualities, the mobilized text chunks were highly similar across question orders, indicating a certain level of reliability.


Based on our findings, we argue that we must not compromise the critical analysis of source materials, which is the core of historical research. Instead, we need to interact with the LLMs using our methods of analyzing the corpus critically and continue to insist on the importance of the source’s verifiability. The verifiability is even more crucial given the unpredictability of LLMs’ responses, which fluctuates across topics and the distribution of information in the corpus. The modus operandi we propose here encapsulates our quest for Open History: it provides a method for controlling text input, ensuring that sources are verifiable, and ensuring that our work is reproducible by other researchers.

